\section{Related Works}
\label{sec:related}

\textbf{HMM-Based Approach.} Event
sampling~\cite{bonakdarpour2011sampling,hauswirth2004low,arnold2008qvm,fei2006artemis}
reduces the overhead of performing runtime verification, yet creates gaps in the
observation. Stoller \textit{et al}~\cite{stoller2011runtime} studied how event
sampling affects the results of runtime verification, and use HMM-based state
estimation techniques to calculate the confidence that the temporal property is
satisfied in the presence of gaps in observation. When considering the packets
as events of the whole system under test, and sniffer as observer, it is
possible to apply the model in~\cite{stoller2011runtime} to our problem.
However, we note several advantages of our augmented transition based approach.
First, we automatically augment the original state machine, which rigorously
encodes the protocol specification and is intuitive to design and easy to verify
correctness at the same time. Second, we use timed automata to monitor the
timing constraints which are common in wireless protocols, while it is known
non-trivial to encode such timing information in Hidden Markov Model. Finally,
domain knowledge can be exploited in our approach to efficiently prune out
unlikely branches during the exhaustive search.

\textbf{Network Protocol Validation.} Lee \textit{et al}~\cite{lee1997passive}
studied the problem of passive network testing of network management. The system
input/output behavior is only partially observable. However, the uncertainty
only lies in missing events in the observation, while in the context of wireless
protocol verification, the uncertainty could also be caused by extra events not
observed by the tested system. Software model checking
techniques~\cite{musuvathi2002cmc,godefroid1997model} have also been used to
verify network protocols. Our problem is unique because of the observation
uncertainty caused by sniffers.

\begin{comment}
\textbf{Sniffer Trace Analysis.} Wireless sniffers has been widely used to
analyze MAC layer behaviors of enterprise wireless
networks~\cite{sheng:wicom2008,tan:tmc2014,yeo-wise04,yeo:witmemo2005}.
Jigsaw~\cite{Cheng:2006:JSP:1159913.1159920} is a larger scale wireless network
monitoring infrastructure. 150~radio monitors were deployed in a campus
building. Traces collected from multiple sniffers were merged and synchronized
to restructure the link and transportation layer conversations. Protocol
specific heuristics were developed to infer the missing packets. The work
in~\cite{Mahajan:2006:AMB:1159913.1159923} shared the same idea of trace merging
with Jigsaw, but uses a FSM to infer packet reception. These works assume the
correctness of the protocol implementation in order to infer missing packets,
while we systematically encode the uncertainty of sniffer traces for
verification purpose.


\textbf{ Testing Under Uncertainty}. The position paper by Rosemblum \textit{et
al}~\cite{Elbaum:2014:KUT:2635868.2666608} contains excellent motivation for the
need to combat uncertainty foundationally when testing systems. McKinley
\textit{et al}~\cite{bornholt2014uncertain,sampson2014expressing} deals with checking
assertions in programs dealing with noisy data from sensors. Instead of checking
the truth or falsity of assertions, they model the probability distribution of
the assertion conditions and perform Monte-carlo based simulations to estimate
the probabilities. Our work can be seen as leveraging non-determinism to weaken
the specification logically to precisely define the problem complexity, and use
probabilities to guide the search for likely mutations.  Other works have used
sampling to find data-race bugs~\cite{marino2009literace}, and ensure that the
sampling does not lead to spurious alarms.
\end{comment}
